Xref: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu alt.atheism:54169 talk.religion.misc:84359 talk.origins:41165
Newsgroups: alt.atheism,talk.religion.misc,talk.origins
Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!das-news.harvard.edu!noc.near.net!howland.reston.ans.net!zaphod.mps.ohio-state.edu!uwm.edu!linac!att!att!allegra!ulysses!ulysses.att.com!mls
From: mls@ulysses.att.com (Michael L. Siemon)
Subject: Re: Ancient references to Christianity (was: Albert Sabin)
Summary: Use of historical sources ...
Message-ID: <1993Apr26.143715.22173@ulysses.att.com>
Date: Mon, 26 Apr 1993 14:37:15 GMT
References: <1r67ruINNmle@ctron-news.ctron.com> <C5ztJu.FKx@news.cso.uiuc.edu> <C62B7n.6B4@news.cso.uiuc.edu>
Organization: AT&T Bell Labs, Murray Hill, NJ, USA
Lines: 83

In article <C62B7n.6B4@news.cso.uiuc.edu> cobb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
(Mike Cobb) writes:

>In <1ren9a$94q@morrow.stanford.edu> salem@pangea.Stanford.EDU (Bruce Salem)
>writes:

>>In article <C5ztJu.FKx@news.cso.uiuc.edu> cobb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
(Mike Cobb) writes:

>>>Why is the NT tossed out as info on Jesus.  I realize it is normally tossed
>>>out because it contains miracles, but what are the other reasons?

>> It is not tossed out as a source, but would it be regarded as
>>unbiased and independant?

Bruce hits the main point simply -- as Russell Turpin does in more detail
in his response.  *All* sources are, in modern historiography, to be used
critically, which is simply to say that any claims deriving from them are
subject to *specific* examination in the light of motives and other HUMAN
considerations (as well as the physical background).  The critical method
applies BOTH to the original document AND to the uses made of it by others
(most emphatically *including* the historical researchers themselves.)

>wouldn't they be a better "reporter" than someone who heard about it second
>hand?  I guess isn't firsthand better than second hand.  I know, there is bias,
>and winners writing history, but doesn't the principle of firsthand being best
>still apply?

But given the critical principle, what evidence is there that we have
ANYTHING at ALL from "firsthand" sources about Jesus?  Paul's letters are
indeed firsthand evidence ABOUT PAUL and his interactions.  They are, as
a result, the most historically solid books in the NT.  Paul's claims and
descriptions about his conflicts with Jerusalem may not be "wie es eigent-
lich gewesen" -- but they are most definitely the comments of a participant!
In other words, we'd evaluate Paul's statements more or less as we would
the testimony of a witness in court.

The gospels are another story altogether.  Luke is most assuredly NOT a
firsthand witness.  He *claims* to have gathered material that is closer
to the actual events -- but this is a conventional claim in ancient books
and Luke in fact NEVER NAMES a witness or points to any one thing in his
book(s) which derive from any source *we* can detect behind Luke.  John
has a concluding remark that it derives from the testimony of a beloved
disciple (who is NOT named.)  We are not bound to accept this claim (for
a long time, some scholars rejected it outright), but even if we do, it
makes the fourth gospel as we have it *at best* secondhand.  Neither Mark
nor Matthew make any claims to be firsthand.  Later (much later) Christian
tradition associates the first gosple with Matthew and a possible Aramaic
proto-gospel, and associates Mark with Peter as having something like the
same second-hand status of recounting Peter's preaching of the gospel.

Such traditional claims run into difficulties if we try to evaluate the
actual data before us.  Luke and Matthew both appear to use (differently!)
an anonymous and not otherwise attested collection of _logoi_ (words and
deeds) of Jesus, as well as to be dependent on Mark.  This makes their
testimony AT LEAST thirdhand.

All that said, historians DO attempt to glean whatever they can from the
NT sources, and they are overwhelmingly the obvious and best sources for
anything about the earliest Church.  They are also *extremely* important
for the light they cast (however refracted through Christian biases) on
the sectarian world of Judaism just before and around the time of the
destruction of the 2nd Temple.

The problem of "the historical Jesus" is tricky, however.  There is a
cycle of fashion on this (and we are now near a major "high" in people
thinking they *can* discern [with historico-critical plausibility] some-
thing about Jesus' life and opinions from the NT.  The difficulty here
(which dominated thinking 50 years ago, and will probably return to favor
in another generation :-)) was pointed out by Bultmann, after Schweitzer's
treatment at the end of the previous high-point on the cycle -- simply
BECAUSE all our sources have passed through AT LEAST one layer of quite
anonymous shaping WITHIN the early Church, we have no easy and reliable
way to distribute ANY part of the material between "real" history and the
inventions of the Church.  There are few "radical skeptics" who think we
have nothing of history in the gospels [though such a position can be
maintained], but neither have we any tools that can distinguish "shaping"
of real historical material by its communal use as opposed to "invention."
--
Michael L. Siemon		"Stand, stand at
Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!magnesium.club.cc.cmu.edu!news.sei.cmu.edu!cis.ohio-state.edu!pacific.mps.ohio-state.edu!zaphod.mps.ohio-state.edu!usc!news.service.uci.edu!unogate!mvb.saic.com!zippy.telcom.arizona.edu!arizona.edu!arizona!amethyst!organpipe.uug.arizona.edu!hindmost!brian
Newsgroups: talk.religion.misc
Subject: Re: [rw] Is Robert Weiss the only orthodox Christian?
Message-ID: <1993Apr27.001326.26727@organpipe.uug.arizona.edu>
From: brian@lpl.arizona.edu (Brian Ceccarelli 602/621-9615)
Date: 27 Apr 93 00:13:26 GMT
Sender: news@organpipe.uug.arizona.edu
References: <C5vGyD.H7s@acsu.buffalo.edu> <1993Apr23.170101.19708@organpipe.uug.arizona.edu> <sandvik-250493171350@sandvik-kent.apple.com>
Organization: Lunar & Planetary Laboratory, Tucson AZ.
Lines: 62

>I'm curious to know if Christians ever read books based on critique
>on the religion, classical text such as "Age of Reason" by Paine,
>or "The Myth Maker" by Jacobi. Sometimes it is good to know your
>enemy, and if you want to do serious research you have to understand
>both sides, and not solely the one and only right one.

Yes, one does.  I examined a critique of the Book of Romans by
I think, Benjamin Franklin once, a Deist.  I found it amazing that
Benjamin Franklin missed the whole boat.   I also have the writings
on Thomas Jefferson sitting on my shelf, and it is amazing how
much he missed.  I have studied Plato's Theory of Forms and
Aristotelian Hylomorphesism.  What a pile of junk.  Jesus
makes Plato and Aristotle look like kindergardeners.  Psychology,
the id, ego, superego by Freud?  Elements of truth, but Jesus
explained it far better and gave reasons.

Thomas Paine, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson are mere men.  They
can screw up the Bible just as well as any man.  I do not put these
men on a pedestal.  And if I remember T.J.'s autobiography correctly,
he thought Thomas Paine was the most unread man he ever met.

Here's some more circular reasoning to you.  Paul says to the Corinthians
that "that the gospel will be foolishness to the world, because it is
spiritually discerned."  And so, people without the spirit of God haven't a
clue to what the Bible is saying.   From your point of view, that's
incredibly circular and convenient.   To me, it is mysteriously and supernaturally
bizarre.   I can see it, but you can't.  This is not arrogance on
my part.  Trust me.  It is as bizarre to you as it is to me.  But nonetheless,
it is a truth, explainable or not.

Are any of you color blind to red and green?  I am.  Remember those
dot tests they do at the optomologist's?  They put pictures in front
of you and you are supposed to identify the pattern in the dots?  If
your eyes are perfectly normal, you can see letters or numerals
embedded in the dots.  They are a slightly different color and stand
out from the background.  But if you are color blind to red and green,
you will not see anything but gray-shaded dots.  That is how a dot
test appears to me.  I do not see a pattern at all.

A normal seeing person will see the patterns.  And to him, I seem like a
total anomaly.  To him, I appear as if I am missing the universe or something.
It is hard for him to understand why I can't see anything
that to him is as plain as day.

That it what it is like with the Bible, the Word of God, to the believer.
The believer can see the meaning in the words.  I can see how the patterns
fit together.  There is such depth.  Such consistency.   But then, on the
other hand, I notice the non-believer.   He doesn't see it.  He thinks
I am weird because he thinks I am seeing things.   I look at him, and
say, "No, you are weird.  You do not see."   Then it is time for a sanity
check.  I go to another Christian and say, "Do you see this."  And
they go, "Yes.  It is an "X"".  And I say, "Thank God, I see the "X"
too."

It is truly the strangest thing.   It adds a little extra dimension to
the phrase,

         "He will make the blind see, and the deaf hear."


I am glad that Jesus has enabled me to see.  I wish every non-believer
could see what they are missing.

I will grant that a star like Mario will draw fans, even if the team sucks.
But this is short term only; I still do